---
layout: post
title: "The Abuse of Power Between Genders in Stoker’s 'Dracula' and Alderman’s
  'The Power': An Essay"
date: 2021-10-20T16:30:41.452Z
header_feature_image: ../uploads/article13-header.jpg
title_color: "#ffffff"
comments: false
tags:
  - ""
---
“The abuse of power is integral to society” (Gilbert, 2017) and defined as one person or group habitually and knowingly using their power to the detriment of others. It is well explored in literature, especially in dystopia, including The Power, where women gradually exploit their newfound ability to manipulate electricity, and gothic novels like Dracula, where Count Dracula plots to invade London and feed upon weaker, vulnerable members of society. The traditionally patriarchal gender power structure is also well explored and a continued source of conflict, especially in today’s society where increasing numbers of male victims are recognised, and it is accepted that all people are capable of aggression towards others. Stoker questions gender structure in Dracula, but all is resolved in a manner typical of Victorian literature, whereas Alderman subverts it in The Power to serve allegorically as a warning that the abuse of power to create a utopia at the expense of the “victims of injustice and tyranny” will create a dystopia with “age after age adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world”, regardless of gender or intent. However, while there is still historical and textual truth to the view that “men are perpetrators and women are victims” (Lasik, unknown) to an extent, both texts also explore the blurring of boundaries and the resultant impact upon society and structures of power, particularly in relation to gender.

.

One of the most archaic and controversial forms of power is the exertion of sexual power, which Stoker explores throughout his novel in various forms- including the seduction of Jonathon by the female vampires with their “deliberate voluptuousness”. Nonetheless, nowhere is the abuse of sexual power more apparent than when Dracula forces Mina to drink his blood. When the men enter the room after Renfield’s warning that Mina is Dracula’s next victim, they find her in a compromising position, Dracula’s “hand gripped her by the back of the neck, forcing her face down” upon his bleeding chest, the scene baring “a terrible resemblance to a child forcing a kitten’s nose into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink”. The Victorian reader’s initial reaction is horror, further exacerbated by the physical brutality of the verbs “gripped” and “forcing”. Dr Van Helsing’s warning over Arthur’s jealousy at the blood transfer hints at sexual connotations. The only times women are active in these situations (Lucy taking blood from men and children, and Mina drinking from Dracula), they are subsequently punished, thereby demonising sexually assertive women and giving men dominance in such instances. Stoker uses this to capitalise on Victorian fears about empowered New Women and revoke their status in an abuse of authorial power, as only women purged of undesirable traits gain peace and acceptance among society (Lucy after she is staked; Mina after the purge of Dracula’s influence). Stoker continues by portraying Dracula in this tender, almost caring act of feeding Mina- which capitalises on the horror of it in the juxtaposition between intention and action. Dracula clutches Mina to his chest, imitating breastfeeding. Dracula is juxtaposed in the simile, compared to a “child”, unaware of the damage he does as he attempts to attempts to parody a maternal role and nurture Mina, as though he does a kindness, redeeming her for her more masculine intelligence by forcing her into passive conformity. It is only after these women have been punished for these sexual acts that they can be redeemed in the eyes of society. Mina herself reflects this judgement when she states the ingestion of blood deems her “’Unclean, unclean!’”, as if consuming blood has irreversibly tainted her, making her unworthy of her husband in light of pseudo-infidelity, for she “’must touch him or kiss him no more…I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have most cause to fear’” because of this cuckoldry.  It is this removal of female sexual power that is classed as abuse, for not only is having desires forbidden, vicious and violent punishment is administered for acting upon them, whether voluntarily or not, because “the overly sexual and unchaste women in society are sinful and evil” (Humphrey, 2014), and thus “women are victims” by being forced into chastity for fear of societal and moral reprisals.

Yet this feminine purity is arguably irrelevant in The Power. Here, men were victimised by lascivious female desires, indicating the reversal of typical gender superiority in this matriarchal dystopia and directly contradicting Stoker’s female vampires constrained by Dracula and “hurled from” the object of their desire during their seduction of Jonathon, thus embodying the female sexuality repressed in Dracula and Victorian women. Tunde is the first victim of “sexual violence” (Jordan, 2016) during his chronicling of the feminist revolution brought about by the skein, “the organ of electricity”. When he stands on a rooftop overlooking the march, he is accosted by a woman. She uses her power to physically assert her sexual desire at his expense, electrocuting him through water to allude that “sexual violence flows in the other direction now” (Jordan, 2016). During the assault, Tunde is confused, reminding himself that “This thing hurts more than it should because it short-circuits your brain. You are confused”. He cannot admit the pain is truly this extreme because of the threat confession poses to his masculinity in this new reality where to be masculine is to be strong yet vulnerable. He must justify his right to feel this pain by stating it “hurts more than it should” and it is therefore acceptable to feel the pain, but he is also attempting to justify his right to say no to his assailant and her sexual advances by asserting himself as more than simply a means of gratification. This abuse of sexual power is shown in the description of this act, how it “short-circuits your brain”, giving the sense that Tunde is being stripped of more than clothing. This woman dismisses his right to control himself and his actions through her abuse to his nervous system. But despite the emotional nature of this assault (both in the memories of Tunde’s mother and emotional repercussions of attempted rape), the rape is not presented as an emotive affair, merely a physical one. This reconfirms dependence upon masculinity and its mandate for indifference in response to even the most traumatic stimuli. Tunde is rationalising events through the matter-of-fact tone Alderman utilises, refusing to acknowledge any psychological implications of rape and therefore attempting to reject the typically female role of assault victim. While this may simply be the emotional disconnect he feels, or him attempting to forget or ignore the rape (as is common of women who cannot escape sexual assaults), it may also be a reflection of society’s linguistic gender bias in “a world which verbalises four times more sexism against men than it does against women” (Martin, 2011) for not having the language to describe the attempted rape of a man- Tunde cannot vocalise the experience not only because he cannot think of a way to describe it (and therefore reverts to an emotionless report), but also because those words do not exist. His internal account also unconsciously mimics the phrasing used by the perpetrators of sexual assault by stating that “You are confused.” and therefore cannot be expected to, or trusted to, speak out against the abuser, removing his right to an opinion in this matter and relegating him to a voiceless “victim” of aggressive female lust.
Both texts deny victims the right to explore or express sexuality and desire. Mina is almost portrayed as fortunate, for not suffering as Lucy did and for almost deserving it as salvation from the New Woman role by returning her to the damsel-in-distress archetype; Tunde is prohibited from admitting pain (emotional or physical) to preserve masculinity. However, whereas female victims of Dracula are put through suffering trials to question conformity to Victorian expectations of female dependence, Alderman’s male victims in The Power affirm gender role inversion in the novel, and represent the men in modern society who are ‘not allowed’ to be the victims of sexual assault (so cannot be recognised as such) or to admit they feel pain, thus not only are women “victims”, it is linguistically impossible for them to be “perpetrators” of the abuse of sexual power despite acts of this nature they commit.

.

It is arguable that the ultimate form of power is the power to bestow life; this is what is believed to indicate the superiority of deities over humanity. Ergo, the ultimate abuse of power is the taking of life- murder. In Dracula, perhaps the most violent murder is the staking of Lucy by the novel’s heroes. Stoker describes the scene through the first-person narrative of observer Dr Seward in great detail. When “Arthur took the stake and hammer…his hands never trembled” not even when he “placed the point over the heart” and “struck with all his might.” Indeed, it is described that “Arthur never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor” while his “untrembling arm rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper the mercy-bearing stake” as he performed his “high-duty” before his accomplices. This narrative is inequitable, denying Lucy or any villain of the novel a voice, despite its format as an epistolary multi-narrative novel. Lucy becomes “The Thing in the coffin” that “writhed” as a “blood-curdling screech came from the opened red lips”. The description focuses on the monstrous, “the sharp white teeth \[that] champed together till the lips were cut” in a rabid manner. She is animalistic, “wild”, in startling contrast with both the “pure, gentle” human version and the seductive “carnal” vampire she becomes, devolving into this “devilish mockery”, as reflected by the lexical shift associated with previously “voluptuous” lips. It is almost with relief that Dr Seward says that “Finally it lay still… \[Because] The terrible task was over”. Meanwhile Arthur’s description as a paragon of masculinity and strength through the simile depicting him as “a figure of Thor”, the Viking “god of sky and thunder and also…fertility” (Mark, 2018), an emblem of heroism and masculinity. This flattering portrayal not only excuses murder, it deifies it and its enactor. The blame is therefore placed on the victim- the radical and demonised vampiric Lucy- and creates a scapegoat to justify the death due to their standing and the righteous tone of the action. Not only this, but Lucy (the victim of this scenario) is denied the right to identity or gender through continued referencing to “The Thing” or “it”; she is no longer to be protected and coddled- she must be eradicated to cleanse society of vampirism and the sins of hedonistic, sexual proclivities associated with it. Despite this justification of the staking due to the representation of sinful vampiric natures, Lucy is still the victim of murder at the hands of men she once trusted with her life, and is subject to their judgement and punishment due to their nature as righteous men and heroes of the novel. As a consequence, “men are perpetrators and women are victims” of the lethal abuse of power in this scene.

Similarly, Alderman depicts deaths in her novel, each of which deliberately becomes increasingly graphic and violent throughout the novel’s progression. Although the most violent death is Darrell’s, the most concerning is arguably the fatal assault of Jos at Darrell’s hands shortly beforehand. The cavalier, enthused attitude with which the biased third-person narrative depicts murder is disturbing. In this segment, Alderman focuses on Darrell’s actions rather than the repercussions which he seems to consider inconsequential. He concentrates on how he “pushed her head down…delivering a charge to the base of her skull.” Although he mentions that “It becomes impossible to fight”, the emphasis is on the fact that “he knows; it was done to him once long ago.” His attention is focused on experience as a victim and knows how “The mind becomes confused, the body goes limp, there is nothing to be done” and becoming the enactor of this. Despite the similarity of their situations. Darrell shows no mercy as “He holds the charge steady.” His glee is concealed but underlying as “The soldier sinks to the floor” because “He waits until she stops twitching” to cease his assault, drawing out the experience for as long as possible. But his delight overwhelms him at the realisation that “He has enough juice left to do the same thing twice over. It feels good. She’s gone.” Her death was fleeting, painful, but power has restored him, returning dominance the assertion of a matriarchy denied him. This is clarified in how, once again, the victim is nameless and instead given a title to remove gender and femininity, this time simply labelling her “The soldier”- a word with traditionally masculine associations that becomes a female duty by the novel’s conclusion. Darrell’s narrative replaces Jos’ once her power falters and she loses dominance over the situation. Jos becomes victim to the “empowering” act Darrell believes is a decisive show of power to his subordinates and will redeem him for his vulnerability in the park he mentions in the extract (a flashback to a violent altercation earlier in the novel) He re-enacts this, using Jos, to rewrite his role and reclaim his dominance and masculinity. He abuses power to reinstate himself and recover his self-image as a powerful and respected mobster, as his father was before him, at Jos’ expense. The novels use narrative to remove the voices of victims through by biasing the changing third-person narrative, focusing on the perspective and actions of dominant characters. Like Stoker, Alderman leaves narrating the event itself to those performing the violent act as an indicator of the prepotent in that scene and to clarify how they feel about the power they wield. Unlike Stoker’s novel, the perspective of this scene shifts between two characters, following the transference of power by showing both as perpetrators who become victims, and shows an enjoyment in the act not reflected in the staking of Lucy. Arthur endures his task (calling it “mercy-bearing” and likening it to a “high-duty”), while Darrell relishes in it (stating “It feels good” to kill). Despite this, both extracts support the idea that “men are perpetrators” of violence and use their power to eradicate female opposition.

.

It is not unheard of for victims to become perpetrators in reality, as is evident in cases such as UK prisons where over “57 per cent of female inmates have been victims of domestic violence, while 53 per cent have experienced emotional, physical or sexual abuse as a child.” (Bulman, 2017). This is reflected in both texts through the lives of Lucy and Allie (Mother Eve). In Dracula, Lucy is changed from a gentle, tender woman into a sexual predator who preys on children- one of society’s greatest taboos, especially for Victorian women who were expected to nurture and protect children. Her description as the Bloofer Lady undeniably juxtaposes her as a human. “The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness” because of the transformation into a vampire and rejection of the maternal role this indicates, as “unchaste women had the ability to challenge the stability and structure of the home, of the family” (Humphrey, 2014). Once she accepts her sexuality and completes the transition, she is no longer an object of pity or mercy- she becomes an object of fear focused on continuing the cycle of pain. This “heartless cruelty” is enacted through violating the taboo of paedophilia (as it is already established that taking blood is equivalent to a sexual act). By attacking children, not only does Stoker make the character repugnant to audiences throughout the novel’s epoch, she has also lost her heart and humanity to become a monster. This is exacerbated by the period’s universal opinion when referring to “wantonness”. Unmarried women such as Lucy were either virgins or harlots- Victorian society seemed to have no middle ground. She shared blood with many men (receiving her earlier wish for polyamory)- and has almost revelled in the freedom this sexual revolution provided by breaking society’s rules and consequently becoming a monster. Lucy is considered monstrous for attacking others once she begins to recreate the abuse she herself was victim to upon others, particularly the vulnerable young, to feed upon societal fears and to explore her newfound power as a vampire and sexually liberated woman.

Although this parodies Allie’s experiences (in that she is a victim who changes and gains power over others as a result), the two characters differ greatly. Allie’s abuse was considered- by Mr Montgomery-Taylor - to be righteous; he was doing God’s work, punishing a “‘Filthy. Little. Whore’” to return her to the proper path out of “Christian charity…and it’s no more than she deserves”. But when the independence of her new identity (“Mother Eve”) is threatened by nuns who wish to burn the girls to restore religious balance, Allie uses her new power as a religious leader and wielder of biological electricity to remove opposition through seemingly natural means- “A heart attack. The kind of thing that could happen at any moment to a woman of her age”. Alderman later reveals that Mother Eve can control the bodies and muscles of others (as she does with Tatiana near the novel’s conclusion). She also gives the impression that “Sister Veronica \[the nun and would-be arsonist] was taken in the moment that she witnessed this miracle \[of a skein becoming visible upon the carving of Jesus on the cross] and so had repented of all her sin.” Mother Eve manipulates the religious power she accrues to remove opposition to her cause in the same way others used the will of God to abuse her. Like Lucy, Mother Eve not only repeats the abuse others inflicted on her onto a group generally considered pure (in this case nuns rather than children) but she is also turning from the maternal nature her name implies and reversing the affectionate, nurturing implications of the title “Mother” that society has historically expected of women.

Moreover, the two novels placed these events relatively near the story’s opening. Both are plot catalysts- occurrences that foreshadow future violence in the novel, while warning reader and character alike of the consequences of disturbing the hierarchy of power. Lucy is an example of the treatment Mina should expect for her acceptance of roles of a New Woman, and to explain to readers the horrifying nature of vampires and the heinous threat they pose. Conversely in The Power, Mother Eve becomes the original sin her name infers. As the Eve of the Bible is the reason humanity is cast from Eden, so too does Mother Eve lead the revolution the book counts down to that causes the global collapse of culture and the birth of new matriarchal civilisations. Both of these female characters represent the abuse of power by being both the “victim” and “perpetrator” of it, and explore “the limitations of a victim-centred understanding of womanhood” (Martin, 2011).

.

It is true that traditionally “men are the perpetrators and women are victims” (Lasik, Unknown) due to the patriarchal structure of Western societies but this is not always the case, and certainly not the case in these novels- especially The Power, where all forms of traditional power are twisted and subverted. Both novels are didactic, exploring how it is possible to abuse power, and while the male characters in these texts are often “perpetrators” of violence, they are not always responsible for it. Nor is it true that the women are only the victims of this abuse; they are also capable of being those who abuse their power and harm the men.

## **Bibliography**

Alderman, N. (2016) *The Power*. London: Penguin.

Bulman, M. (2017) ‘More than half of female prisoners are victims of domestic violence, new research shows’, *The Independent*, 4 December. Available at: <https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/female-prisoners-women-prison-domestic-violence-victims-more-than-half-prison-reform-trust-report-a8089841.html> (Accessed: 6 December 2012)

Gilbert, S. (2017) ‘What If Women Had The Power?’, The Atlantic, 22 October. Available at: <https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2017/10/what-if-women-had-the-power/543135/> (Accessed: 6 December 2021)

Humphrey, R. (2014) ‘Ideals of Victorian Women as Depicted in ‘Dracula’’, *The Artifice*, 11 March. Available at: <https://the-artifice.com/dracula-victorian-woman/> (Accessed: 6 December 2021)

Jordan, J. (2016) ‘The Power by Naomi Alderman review – if girls ruled the world’, The Guardian, 2 November. Available at: <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/02/the-power-naomi-alderman-review> (Accessed: 6 December 2021)

Lisak, D. (Unknown) in Goodreads (Unknown) *David Lisak > Quotes*. Available at: <https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/8382177.David_Lisak> (Accessed: 6 December 2021)

Mark, J. J (2018) ‘Thor’, *World History Encyclopedia*, 17 December. Available at: <https://www.ancient.eu/Thor> (Accessed : 6 December 2021)

Martin, T. (2011) ‘You can’t deny it. Gender studies is full of male-blaming bias’, *The Guardian*, 14 September. Available at <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/sep/14/gender-studies-male-blaming-bias> (Accessed: 6 December 2021)

Stoker, B. (1897) *Dracula*. Unknown : Amazon Classics (2017 edn).